---
layout: post
title: "“A Diet of Bloodshed and Adventure”: Emotion and Carleton Coon’s Masculine Anthropology"
tags: science anthropology gender war politics conservatism
---

The anthropologist Carleton Coon is now best known for his views on the separate evolution of human races and his secret support for his cousin Carleton Putnam’s segregationist propaganda. Coon was also active in the fields of archaeology and Middle East studies, however, and served in the Office of Strategic Services, a predecessor to the Central Intelligence Agency, during World War II. Throughout his career, Coon constructed a masculine presentation for himself that combined daring exploration with intellectual mastery. “His… professional history,” wrote the psychologist Anne Roe aptly, “is one of digs in wild places, of rows with colleagues, of being put upon in one way and another and blowing up, and so on.”

This paper is a study of Coon’s self fashioning and his relationships with broader masculine cultures of violence and geographical exploration, themselves linked through a history of imperialism in which Coon participated. Because I’m drawing primarily from Coon’s own published work, it is a study of the image Coon presented to his audience as much as of a historical figure. That said, Coon situated himself within two social circles: an informal fraternity of explorers, and a New England “old boy” network centered at Harvard University.

Coon consciously modeled himself on a number of explorers and soldiers of earlier generations. According to his memoirs, as he was growing up in Wakefield, Massachusetts his hero was his grandfather, who had served in the Union Army during the Civil War, travelled in Africa and the Middle East, and “knew [journalist Henry Morton] Stanley’s book on Africa almost by heart.” Roe, who developed a profile of Coon in 1952 while writing her book *The Making of a Scientist*, wrote that “very likely the key to this man (apart from his terrific energy) is the fact that the person he was closest to throughout his childhood was his paternal grandfather, who had had a lovely time in the Civil War and later travelling to wild parts of the earth.” Coon agreed. “I think he had a lot to do with what I did,” Coon told Roe. “He took care of me. He was my nurse. He told me all sorts of stories so I was brought up on a diet of bloodshed and adventure when I was a child. I didn’t think much of that until recently but I think it’s probably important.” (Coon also had a nanny, Bertha, who took care of him as an infant and taught him to read before kindergarten, suggesting that his grandfather was his nurse only occasionally.)

Coon described his mother as “kind and generous,” but told Roe he was “generally fairly antagonistic” towards her because “she was always trying to stop me from trying to do things.” His father was often away from home due to his business as an importer, but Coon became closer to him after his grandfather died, and told Roe that “father invited us [Coon and his brothers] to drink with him in the cellar… at all ages.” Coon was inspired to study ancient Egyptian in high school “because both my father and grandfather had been connected with Egypt in one way or another,” primarily through importing cotton, and because he aspired to be an archaeologist and explorer.

Similarly, Coon studied Arabic in college in part because he “wanted to learn to pray flawlessly so that when I became an explorer I might pass as a proper Muslim, like my fabled heroes, Sir Richard Burton and Charles Doughty.” Burton was a British and East India Company military officer who explored Africa for the Royal Geographical Society, served as a diplomat, and made a pilgrimage to Mecca disguised as a Muslim. Doughty, an English writer, published a classic account of his *Travels in Arabia Deserta* in 1888. Although Coon himself never perfected his accent to the point of tricking native Arabic speakers, he did travel extensively in Africa and the Middle East.

Coon was flattered when others compared him to these earlier explorers. In his memoir, for example, he quoted with pride his mentor in anthropology, Earnest Hooton.

>Coon is quite as energetic in the analysis of his material as in the collecting of it. He goes at it with a kind of divine frenzy, inventing new methods of analysis, improving on old ones, cursing, tearing his hair when he gets into difficulties, yet always emerging, disheveled but triumphant. He is a bit like Colonel Lawrence and a great deal like Sir Richard Burton, possibly a little erratic, and with more than a spark of genius.

Coon was also pleased to learn that his two novels about Morocco, *Flesh of the Wild Ox* and *The Riffian*, were found near the bed of T. E. Lawrence, also known as Lawrence of Arabia, when he died in 1935. Lawrence’s brother William wrote Coon that the two of them “had thought me much older because of the way I wrote.” In his writing style and his self fashioning more generally, Coon was a late specimen of a sort of Orientalist explorer and travel writer that flourished at the turn of the century.

Unlike the explorers he idolized, though, Coon was an academic. The first in his family to go to college—his ancestors, he told Roe, had all been farmers and businessmen, except for one “non-conformist” minister—Coon remained at Harvard after he graduated in 1925, even keeping the same dormitory apartment, and earned a Ph.D. in 1928 at the age of 24. According to Roe, Coon “was brought up to expect that he would never have to work because his father was extremely wealthy.” Until 1934, when he joined the faculty at Harvard and moved to the suburbs of Boston, Coon had an office at the Peabody Museum but may not have had a job.

Coon suggests that his athletic ineptitude and general clumsiness played an important role in turning him towards academia. In high school at Phillips Academy—typically referred to as Andover—he was knocked out playing football and had some success in track, but “when I staggered up to the bleachers after crossing the finish line,” he writes, “I threw up on the shoes of the director of athletics.” He apparently did better in the “clandestine sport” of farting contests held on the shore of a pond. In college at Harvard Coon tried out for crew, but stepped through the floor of a racing shell. He was also barred from fencing because he was left-handed. Coon “compensated to a certain extent for my lack of athletic prowess” by tutoring athletes for free; rather than resenting the athletic success of others, he portrays himself as seeking ways to contribute to the success of his schools’ teams. In short, Coon embraced the masculine ideal of athletic prowess even when he did not himself live up to it.

Coon also presented himself as mischievous and violent, writing about the fights he got into with Irish Catholics as a boy in which he took out another boy’s eye with a rock. Indeed, he was sent to Andover after two years at Wakefield High School for “throwing stinkballs in class and pouring ink in a boy’s seat while he was standing up, thus ruining his trousers when he sat down,” shooting a pencil at a teacher with a rubber band, and finally flooding the school basement when he “hung by my arms from the pipes overhead, like an ape” and broke them. Roe described this as “a pattern of violent and physically expressed revolt against authority of any sort” which continued beyond his school years, but Coon himself saw his time at Andover as reforming, writing that he “was transformed, I hope, from a confused, spoiled, overconfident adolescent into a youth capable of taking care of himself under most circumstances, though with little social grace.”

The circumstances in which Coon placed himself were often unusual and dangerous ones. In 1924, while still an undergraduate, he went to Morocco for the first time. He was inspired by a course on Africa taught by Earnest Hooton, who had never been there, and especially by Hooton’s “vivid” description of “the allegedly blood-thirsty habits of the Riffians,” Berbers who were engaged in a rebellion against Spanish colonialism between 1920 and 1926. While there, Coon and his companion Gordon Browne explored caves and considered enlisting in the Riffian army.

The next year Coon returned with his Harvard classmate Thomas Arnold Barrett Scudder. Friends like Scudder also combined academic and adventurous interests, sharing Coon’s daring. Coon wrote of an occasion on which Scudder and another classmate “popped out of a sixth-floor attic window of the Peabody Museum and ran out onto the two-foot-wide, downward-sloping zinc ledge outside,” ran around the building on the ledge, and then wrestled before coming back in. Similarly, a student of Coon who studied Arabic and successfully disguised himself as a Arab in Libya died after returning to Harvard: he was wrestling on a landing and fell down the stairs. This sort of recklessness physicality at school seems to have stemmed from the same courage that led Coon and his friends to spend their summers exploring Morocco.

These Harvard undergraduates also had a certain disrespect for foreign authorities that got them into fights with police on multiple occasions. Their disrespect was not constrained to anti-authoritarianism, but extended to violating foreign taboos. Coon photographed the “dance of the Hamadsha,” for example, a religious practice in which followers of a particular saint “danced themselves into a frenzy, frothed at the mouth, [and] sliced their own heads with axes”; he found himself chased by the ax-wielding dancers.

On a 1929 trip to Albania, which Hooton sent him on in order to conduct research on “the wildest whites,” Coon’s Muslim companions relied on him to tell them when it was 6:00 pm so they could break their Ramadan fast. As the only one with the watch, he became tired of their impatience to eat and told them the fast was over an hour early. What’s curious about Coon is not so much that he was occasionally inconsiderate but that he was so eager to tell these stories. His memoirs depict him as an adventurer, but not always as a hero.

Indeed, Coon was frequently an angry man. He wrote that when he hit his head on a low ceiling in Albania and a local laughed at him, “still dazed, I stood up and punched him in the solar plexus, flattening him in turn.” He also held grudges, telling Roe that “I got kicked out of the Boy Scouts because I had a fight with Lucius Beebe,” who later became a prominent journalist. “I detested him and still do,” he continued. “I beat him up once in college. It gave me great pleasure.”

Roe wrote that Coon’s Rorschach test “starts out sounding like a violently aggressive psychopath, wallowing in gore, ripping out against everything, and winds up with colorful good humor, and very restrained aggression.” More specifically, she wrote that her test subject seemed to respond to anxiety with “belligerent attack.” “The sort of initiative that is probably always getting him into trouble,” she continued, “partly because he is intolerably sensitive.… He would be most undependable, and like to violent rages and lack of emotional control generally.” In her summary, she added that “this seems to have been characteristic through his life, also.”

Coon told Roe a great deal about his sexual history, and she found his Rorschach test “shows him to equate sex with aggression and sadism.” He explained that he was “very shy and covered with pimples and all that” as a boy and dated only a little in high school, but “fell off the white seat” of virginity in Paris in 1924, at the age of 20, “filled with champagne and franc notes.” The next year he began dating Mary Goodale, a Wellesley undergraduate he later described as “a young woman of great beauty and a fiery disposition.” Their grandfathers had been friends, and Coon emphasized in his memoir that hers too had been a soldier, “Brigadier General Greenleaf A. Goodale, a veteran of many wars from the Civil to the Spanish, including Indian fighting in the West.” Coon was not monogamous, however. “Around that time,” he told Roe, “I impregnated one of the secretaries at the Peabody Museum. Maybe she produced. That I don’t know.” Coon paid more attention to Goodale’s fertility, telling Roe that she “claimed she was pregnant and then she began menstruating but by that time I was in it and I stayed in it for 18 years.”

They married in 1926. The next year she, pregnant, went with him on his third trip to Morocco for a combination honeymoon and anthropometry research trip. From there they went to Paris, where she gave birth to their first son. Coon told Roe that he remained devoted and monogamous for most of their marriage: “I could have slipped her when she went off with that German baron,” he said. “I had a very rugged time indeed. I remained faithful all that period. It was a tough break. In the war I took advantage of my opportunities. She was sore about that although she was taking plenty of advantage of hers.” Coon later described Goodale as sadistic. He was intensely allergic to eggs from childhood (though sometimes stubborn enough to eat them anyway while travelling) and told Roe that “my first wife used to put eggs in my food and wouldn’t tell me she had done so and then finally she would and she would laugh and laugh while I vomited. She used to beat the kids, too.” When they divorced, Coon took custody of their two sons because he could afford to raise them.

Over the course of his trips to Morocco, Coon came to identify closely with the Riffians, writing that he “had lived briefly among a friendly people who were still free.” He felt that he and the Riffians shared a personality: “it seemed easy for me to understand men of another culture without language,” he wrote, “if our minds worked the same way.” Most strikingly, he wrote that his books about the Rif were his best “because I was a Riffian.”

Coon supported Riffian independence from the civil and military imperialism of Spain and France, but did not challenge the cultural imperialism of missionaries, telling Roe that “I don’t hold the usual anthropological brief [sic] against missionaries. I think they are good tough guys and I like them.” Coon also challenged cultural relativism, arguing that cultures could be arranged on a scale of complexity and that quantitative change produced qualitatively different cultures. Although he doesn’t seem to have explicitly claimed that more complex cultures were superior, Coon saw himself as violating a standard position in anthropology.

In 1941, Coon and Gordon Browne began doing research for the COI (Coordination of Information), which later became the Office of Strategic Services and was a predecessor of the Central Intelligence Agency. That November Wallace Phillips of the Navy came to his office and “informed me that I had been chosen to be the Lawrence of Morocco.” There was to be a German invasion of Morocco, Coon was told, and “aside from direct American participation, the only force that could stop the Germans was a rejuvenated Riffian army, still smarting from the loss of their freedom in 1926. I was to offer the Riffians hope, to unite them, and to arm them.” Coon did not end up leading the Riffians, perhaps because some officers “disapproved [of] the use of natives,” but he did spend the next few years engaged in guerrilla warfare.

Coon wrote extensively of his own attitudes and motivations as a soldier. This passage, for example, is the beginning of his book *A North Africa Story: The Anthropologist as OSS Agent*:

>Since childhood I have wanted to do the kind of work I have been doing for the past year. There should be nothing unusual in this; it is probably the secret ambition of every boy to travel in strange mountains, stir up tribes, and destroy the enemy by secret and unorthodox means. Most boys, however, grow up, and as they adjust themselves to civilized living this ambition usually dies.

>I my particular case, I think my family and friends will be all too quick to agree, I have never in this sense, at least, completely grown up, and I have been able to fill in the period between boyhood and warfare by alternative tasks that permitted this ambition to survive.

Coon also saw the war itself as part of his growing up, though since he was in his late 30s it came a bit later in life for him than for most G.I.s. “I feel that I went through an ancient and fabulous rite of passage and maintained the tradition of service to my country that my then-blind grandfather taught me when I was very young,” he wrote. Coon’s military service combined patriotism with the lust for adventure which had driven his anthropological career, and continued to express the influence of his grandfather. His actual work primarily involved devising guerrilla tactics and training soldiers on them, as well as arms smuggling. He and Browne had the idea of making mines that looked like mule turds, for example, and “plastic turds were used in at least one battle.” He also trained a group of anti-Vichi volunteers in Algiers, including “French royalists, colons, some Arabs, Jews, Spaniards, and other,” in such skills as using hand grenades and tying up hostages. One of them assassinated the Vichy Admiral Jean-François Darlan, an event in which Coon may have been involved, although he denied prior knowledge. Coon also trained Arabs to blow up railroad tracks, and himself set booby traps on the Mediterranean coast. He was strafed by German airplanes while guarding a lighthouse there, and hit on the head by a roof tile, causing memory and night vision loss. “I forgot words in English,” he wrote, “but did better in French and Arabic, which I had learned later—a classic syndrome.”

Throughout this whole period Coon was technically a civilian working for a secret military agency, although he sometimes wore a British officer’s uniform. In 1943, he was called back to the United States to be trained as an officer and commissioned as an Army major. He then aided in the American invasion of Corsica, where he led soldiers into battle. Soon after this, Coon began to lose consciousness daily due to his head injury and was sent to the United States again for medical treatment. Coon was given a medical discharge on grounds of “psychoneurosis, anxiety, and hysteria, severe,” and returned to Harvard, where he taught Anthropology 1 to “a small clutch of conscientious objectors and minority students whose allegiance was more to other lands than the the United States.” With the return of patriotic soldiers and the G.I. Bill, Coon wrote, “the quality of my audience improved sharply.”

According to his account, it was while he was in the hospital that his first wife, Mary Goodale, divorced him. He wasted no time in marrying Lisa Dougherty, a cartographer who had travelled the world working for Frederick Wulsin, another anthropologist and explorer. The couple had apparently only just met, and “were married in defiance of the laws of Massachusetts.” Dougherty contributed drawings to Coon’s later books. As Coon became involved in heated debates about race, he told Roe that “I need her, because I get so depressed—I have to have her.” Their marriage apparently lasted until Coon’s death in 1981.

The whole Coon family—Coon, his wife Lisa, and his two sons—returned to Morocco in 1947 on a cave archaeology expedition, and Coon was to spend a great deal of time on caves, particularly in Iran, over the next decade or so. Around the same time, the University of Pennsylvania’s Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology hired Coon as a curator, promising him that he need only teach one course a year, rather than the full load he dreaded at Harvard. The rest of Coon’s life story consists of extensive travel and archaeology, as well as a great deal of writing on anthropology generally and on the subject of race in particular.

Coon calmed down somewhat after his war experience and his second marriage. He seems to have become angry less frequently and to have expressed his anger less physically, though this may be only his way of telling his life story. It was also after the war the Coon began to have great academic success, publishing a number of textbooks, being elected to the National Academy of Sciences, and becoming president of the American Association of Physical Anthropologists.

Nonetheless, Coon retained his antagonistic attitude toward those with whom he differed on scientific matters. He threatened Theodosius Dobzhansky with a libel suit after Dobzhansky wrote that his  treatment of the independent evolution of races amounted to “semantic mischief” which could easily be taken advantage of by racist propagandists. When a colleague mentioned that Ashley Montagu had recently visited him in 1977, Coon responded, “You had Ashley Montagu in your office? And you didn’t shoot him?” Coon also perceived himself as oppressed by his opponents, writing to Dobzhansky that “you forget your own irresponsibility in exposing a fellow scientist to what I have had to undergo as a result of your own actions. Why have you done this? When will you stop?” Around the same time, Coon told Roe that “I’ve been so disturbed by all this integration/segregation business and being shot at so, that I haven’t been able to work, I can’t concentrate.” He also discovered he had diabetes and told Roe that “the doctor says that sometimes you can get it just from shock—if you’ve got the hereditary tendency—and I did get it from shock—from those people.” Roe wrote after the interview that Coon “is one of the most original in the group” of scientists she studied, but “also one of the most disturbed.”

The ways in which Coon performed his masculinity are complicated and became more complicated as his life went on. His turn towards particularly vigorous forms of academic achievement through exploration seems to have been related to his failure as an athlete as well as his lifelong interest in following in his grandfather’s soldier/traveler footsteps. He was often an acute self-analyst, attributing influence to his grandfather and describing how he had never “grown up” and given up the dream of imperialist warfare. He lacked sympathy for others, though, and seems to have felt a responsibility to achieve but not one to care, not coincidental given cultural associates of achievement with masculinity and caring with femininity.

One final aspect of his thought can be seen through the connection Coon maintained to the military. In 1962 he took part in a conference on the public’s reaction to learning that hydrogen bombs release Strontium-90. “My feeling,” he wrote, “was that old-fashioned Americans of northern European stock do not scare easily or quickly.… Our people are bothered by local alarms about leaky atomic power plants and hidden chemical dumps that cause genetic defects. Our reactions are more anger than fear; our response is action rather than hysteria.” Coon’s identification of Americanism with a particular ethnicity is disturbing, but his identification of these “old-fashioned Americans” with his own emotional patterns is intriguing. Through his life, Coon reacted to virtually every negative stimulus with anger rather than fear, and it took battle to drive him to hysteria.

**Works Cited**
- Carleton S. Coon, *Adventures and Discoveries: The Autobiography of Carleton S. Coon* (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1981).
- Carleton S. Coon, *A North Africa Story: The Anthropologist as OSS Agent 1941–1943* (Ipswitch, Mass.: Gambit, 1980), 3.
- Matthew R. Goodrum, “Coon, Carleton Stevens,” in <cite>New Dictionary of Scientific Biography</cite> (Detroit: Scribner’s, 2008).
- Jonathan Marks, “[Human Biodiversity as a Central Theme of Biological Anthropology: Then and Now](https://digicoll.lib.berkeley.edu/record/84024),” *Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers* 84 (2000).
- [Anne Roe], “An 2 Summary” (March 1952), Carleton Stevens Coon file, [Anne Roe Papers](https://search.amphilsoc.org/collections/view?docId=ead/Mss.B.R621-ead.xml), American Philosophical Society.
- [Anne Roe], “An 2 Rorschach Analysis” ([c. 1952]), Coon File, Roe Papers.
- [Anne Roe], “Notes taken after tape,” “An 2” (November 1962), Coon file, Roe Papers.
- [Anne Roe and Carleton Coon], “An 2” ([1948]), Coon file, Roe Papers.
- [Anne Roe and Carleton Coon], “An 2” (November 1962), Coon file, Roe Papers.
- Pat Shipman, *The Evolution of Racism: Human Differences and the Use and Abuse of Science* (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1994), 283–284.